In “Ideas Have Consequences: The Impact of Law and Economics on American Justice”, the influence of economics education, in the context of the economics and law movement, is examined through judge participation in the Manne Economics Institute for Federal Judges. By 1990, forty percent of federal judges had attended the Manne Economics Institute. 

This study examined and cross-referenced a variety of datasets including, circuit court decision from 1891 to 2013 (380,000 cases), district court cases from 1992 to 2011 (1.03 million and 856,000 cases), judge biographies from the Federal Judicial Center, and Manne Program attendance between 1976 and 1999. Additionally, a variety of methods were used to analyze these datasets for the influence of the economics and law movement and education on judge decisions. These analyses leveraged word embedded based distance measures from machine translation and natural language processes to quantify the prevalence of economics and law language in legal rulings, hand labelled data encoded in the Songer-Auburn database, machine encoded data for rulings for / against labour or environmental agencies, hand-labelled data in regards to anti-trust cases, and sentencing length for criminal cases. 

As the title of this paper suggests, ideas, such as those that would be exposed in economics and law education, can have significant effects on how judges write and rule on cases. These kinds of ideas can even spread beyond those who had formal education on the topic due to the direction of judicial education and the reliance on jurisprudence in a common law society like the United States of America. From the diversity of the datasets and the methods of analysis, Ash et al present a compelling case for the effects of economics influence over the judiciary. Some plausible explanations put forth include the development of a logical framework which emphasizes economic efficiency, maximizing value, providing sufficient cost deterrent (to outweigh the value of a crime) and other economic ideas, leading to a consistent basis for decisions and establishing consistent jurisprudence.  

The use of such large datasets which encompass judge rulings, their affiliations, and their attendance of the Manne Program seems appropriate in analyzing the primary research question, whether attendance of the Manne Program leads judges to make decisions that are typically more conservative or rooted in economic theory, as well as the broader question of the role of the economics and law movement in the American judiciary. 

The use of advances in natural language processing seems especially novel in associating the results of attending the Manne Program to justice decisions through the language used in court ruling. While this by itself would not be conclusive, the results of the analysis and correlation between the judge rulings and the economics-and-law language used by Ellickson present corroborating evidence towards the influence of economic theory in the minds of judges. Alongside the positive correlations found within the Songer-Auburn database (judicial decision outcomes), rulings against regulatory agencies (labour and environment), and in length of criminal sentencing (particularly in the post-Brooker decision where judge discretion is increased), Ash et al provide a solid case for the effect of the Manne Economics Institute for Federal Judges on their rulings post-attendance.

I think one area that is presented quite well are the various fixed effects which might otherwise make the conclusion less trustworthy. The use if judge-level fixed effects seems appropriate in addressing the potential effects of appointing party, education, and past career experience. Alongside year-level fixed effects and other temporal controls, the overall analysis seems quite sound. One particular issue that the authors brought up was in the potential self-selection of attendees of the Manne Economic Institute, where Republican (conservative-leaning) judges might have a preference. Their discussion on the nature of attendance (no recruitment, first-come-first-serve, general reputation even among Democrat attendees) present a plausible case for the relative exogenous relationship between a judge’s political leaning and their attendance of the Manne Program.

The one area in the paper which I felt was weaker than the other other sections was in the analysis of the anti-trust decisions. The paper found a positive, but imprecise, correlation between the rulings against anti-trust cases pre and post attendance. The discussion present plausible explanations for the correlation including the political currents which favoured laissez-faire economics and laxer regulations to maximize economic efficiency and economies of scale. The principle issues with the dataset is its small size (100 cases for the event study sample), and the reliance on hand-labelled data by law students. The dataset was also combined from varying sources (Songer-Auburn, the Federal Judicial Center's Administrator of Courts dataset, and a legal search engine) which leads to some potential issues with analysis standardization. Once a more detailed dataset or systematic way of classifying anti-trust decisions is developed, this could be one area of further study. 

Overall, “Ideas Have Consequences: The Impact of Law and Economics on American Justice,” presents a powerful case for how conservative economic forces can have lasting influence over the judicial system and the potential consequences that might impact the state of jurisprudence. The relationship between the funding sources of institutes like the Manne Program also presents potential conflicts of interests which shape the direction of the United States of America. With such significant influence over the judicial branch of government, further research should look critically at the consequences caused by external actors on governance, democracy, and justice, not just in the United States of America but all across the world. 
